# Weekly status report

From 2017-05-20 to 2017-06-02

## Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) demo

Continuing the work from last week I managed to get basic BLE functionality
working on the nRF51822. The device can now *advertise* itself and shows up in
the Bluetooth search menu of my phone (see this [tweet]). At this point it
compiles from both Linux and Windows but the demo is just a giant blob of
`unsafe` code because I'm directly using the bindgen generated bindings. It
needs a safer API before I can post it to u.r-l.o.

[tweet]: https://mobile.twitter.com/japaricious/status/869777549697703936

## Blog post

I wrote a [blog post] about the different alternatives one has to log data
and/or debug messages from a microcontroller to a PC. In particular I covered
the ITM (Instrumentation Trace Macrocell) peripheral which is designed for this
kind of task but seems to be a bit underused in practice (specially in the
hobbyist space).

[blog post]: http://blog.japaric.io/itm

## Performance tracking tool

The ITM also has functionality for performance tracking. In principle you can
use the information that the ITM tracks to build flame graphs of your program,
count context switches, measure time spent servicing interrupts, do code
coverage, etc. In practice I haven't seen any open source tool for that. Of
course there are companies that sell (expensive) debug probes with proprietary
software for this kind of thing.

I think this would be a really nice tool to have in the embedded Rust toolbelt
since it's missing in the (open source) embedded C toolbelt. I have opened [an
issue] about this to gauge interest and that also contains potential next steps
on the implementation of such tool.

[an issue]: https://github.com/rust-embedded/rfcs/issues/28

## Increasing discoverability of the embedded Rust ecosystem

Part of the comments in the [requirements u.r-l.o thread][u.r-l.o] showed that
people weren't aware of the of the state of the embedded Rust ecosystem (crates
and tools) until *after* they read the u.r-l.o thread. A few people specifically
requested a central place to get *up to date* information about the embedded
Rust ecosystem. One person even suggested placing a link to this place in the
rust-lang.org domain.

[u.r-l.o]: https://users.rust-lang.org/t/rust-for-embedded-development-where-we-are-and-whats-missing/10861

So I'm tackling this issue of lack of information in two ways:

- Increasing the discoverability of embedded *crates* on crates.io using
  categories. [issue]

[issue]: https://github.com/rust-embedded/rfcs/issues/27

- Working on the content for an areweembeddedyet.com website (we already had the
  domain). [draft]

[draft]: https://github.com/rust-embedded/rfcs/issues/15#issuecomment-305892023

## Rust on the Blue Pill and a Hardware Abstraction Layer (HAL)

The third development board that I have to add Rust support to is the [Blue
Pill]. I already got quite a few of its peripherals working from Rust: GPIO,
Serial, SPI, PWM, ADC, Quadrature encoder, etc.

As these are pure Rust implementations I want to use the APIs I have developed
for this board as a starting point to discuss a rustic HAL. One of the
requirements of the HAL, which is a set of traits as per my proposal, is that it
must be implementable for different devices and that's easier for others to test
if the reference implementation of the HAL traits is all in Rust.

[Blue Pill]: http://wiki.stm32duino.com/index.php?title=Blue_Pill

## TODO

- More blog posts
- Start HAL discussion
- Work towards svd2rust milestone
- Deep dive into the Tock kernel build system. (Still waiting for my development
  board.)
