# Weekly status report

From 2017-05-12 to 2017-05-18

## Rust on the photon

The photon is an ARM development board with WiFi connectivity by [Particle].
Particle offers a cloud service and a REST API to interact (e.g. log data) and
control photon boards remotely.

[Particle]: https://www.particle.io/

I created a [Cargo template] that lets you develop Rust applications with
relative ease. I have successfully tested the template on both Linux and Windows
(had to port a shell script to Rust to make the workflow work on Windows).

[Cargo template]: https://github.com/japaric/photon-quickstart#photon-quickstart

I also created safe bindings on top of their Spark firmware which exposes a C
API. Not the whole firmware API is exposed at this time but I have exposed the
cloud functionality in a safe manner and wrote [some demos] that make use of it.

[some demos]: https://github.com/japaric/photon-quickstart/blob/8abc3535d8e3a47c120a49f459c449bf3fe77fbf/examples/function.rs

Then I [presented] my work on their forums and asked for feedback. The post had
good reception from the community, the CEO and the CTO. At this point in time I
have [one collaborator] from the Particle community; I hope more people will
chime in after the announcement on their forums.

[presented]: https://community.particle.io/t/howto-rust-on-the-photon/32927
[one collaborator]: https://github.com/japaric/photon-quickstart/pulls?utf8=âœ“&q=is:pr%20author:dbrgn%20

## Workflow errors

I did an analysis of the errors users can encounter when using the
[cortex-m-quickstart], the [Tock userland] and the [photon-quickstart]
templates on Linux and on Windows. The full report is in the
2017-05-workflow-errors.md document.

[cortex-m-quickstart]: https://docs.rs/cortex-m-quickstart/0.1.5/cortex_m_quickstart/
[Tock userland]: https://github.com/helena-project/libtock-rs
[photon-quickstart]: https://github.com/japaric/photon-quickstart#photon-quickstart

(Brian, I figured out what was the cause of the really weird linker error that a
user reported on IRC last week. Turns out that using `CARGO_INCREMENTAL` was
causing the linker errors. I haven't investigated the root of the problem but I
*think* that incr. comp. doesn't preserve uses of the `#[linker_section]`
attribute.)

I improved one error message [in Xargo]. All the other messages can't be
improved from the Rust side so I wrote comprehensive troubleshooting guides for
the [cortex-m-quickstart][quickstart] and the [photon-quickstart][photon]
templates.

[in Xargo]: https://github.com/japaric/xargo/pull/136
[quickstart]: https://docs.rs/cortex-m-quickstart/0.1.5/cortex_m_quickstart/#troubleshooting
[photon]: https://github.com/japaric/photon-quickstart/tree/8abc3535d8e3a47c120a49f459c449bf3fe77fbf#troubleshooting

## RFC: preferred way to do linker customization

Started a [discussion] about what should be the preferred way to pass extra
custom linker arguments, which are always required in embedded development, to
rustc when using Cargo. We have two approaches available today:

[discussion]: https://github.com/rust-embedded/rfcs/pull/24

- Use custom targets. Set the `{pre,,post}-link-args` fields as required.
- Use `.cargo/config`. Set `target.$T.rustflags` as required.

The RFC proposes settling on `.cargo/config` as the preferred way as it has
advantages over the custom target approach. The latter forces you to use Xargo
to produce and manage one sysroot per custom target.

I sent a [PR] to rust-lang/rust to add a `-Z pre-link-arg` flag to rustc. This
flag is required to put the `.cargo/config` on par with the custom target
approach.

[PR]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/41971

So far the participants in the RFC have expressed their preference for the
`.cargo/config` method but are concerned about the fact that `.cargo/config` is
a hidden file. They would prefer if the linker settings could be written in the
more visible `Cargo.toml` file. These linker settings would work like the
`[profile.dev]` setting where the only top crate settings are considered by
Cargo. I'll ask Alex for his opinion on this matter.

## Gathering requirements from the Rust community

I went through the [rust-embedded/rfcs] issue tracker to learn about the needs
of embedded Rust developers. Some topics seemed to repeat:

[rust-embedded/rfcs]: https://github.com/rust-embedded/rfcs/issues

### A Hardware Abstraction Layer

This layer takes care of abstracting away the hardware. So instead of writing
code that directly manipulates registers, which are device specific, you work
with slightly higher level API that hides all the device specific details.

With a HAL it would be possible to write generic driver crates (crates to
interface with external sensors like accelerometers) that contain no device
specific code so it's important to growth the embedded crate ecosystem.

There's agreement on that this layer should be represented as a set of traits
but there isn't agreement on what the API should look like. As there are
different concurrency models one can used in embedded systems it's not clear
where the HAL should try to work with all those or whether there should be more
than one HAL specialized to each concurrency model.

All this requires more experimentation.

### A configuration manager.

Once you have a HAL you can write applications that contain no device specific
code. The problem that arises then is how do you build that generic program for
device / board A, B, C, and D?

Two options have been discussed: custom targets and Cargo features.

A custom target per device is overkill because then you need to build a sysroot
per target. In some cases devices A and B belong to the same architecture so the
produced sysroot will be exactly the same; the difference between building an
application for either of those two devices are only in the linker arguments.

Cargo features are unsatisfactory because they are binary (on/off). If you map
one device to one Cargo feature then it becomes possible to have nonsensical
combination of features like being device A and B at the same time.

So it seems that we need a tool that drives Cargo for this job. One such tool
used in the C world is [PlatformIO].

[PlatformIO]: http://platformio.org/

## Current needs

I have started a [thread] on users.rust-lang.org to ask what are the *current*
needs of embedded developers because the issues in the rust-embedded/rfcs repo
haven't see much movement in the last months so they may not reflect the current
needs.

[thread]: https://users.rust-lang.org/t/rust-for-embedded-development-where-we-are-and-whats-missing/10861

## TODO

- Rust support for the [Blue Pill] board

[Blue Pill]: http://wiki.stm32duino.com/index.php?title=Blue_Pill

- Deep dive into TockOS *kernel* development workflow
  - Blocked: Waiting for hardware

- Start thread on rust-embedded/rfcs about a configuration manager.
  - what are the requirements.
  - check PlatformIO in detail

- Start producing `rust-std` components on rust-lang/rust for the `thumbv*m`
  targets.
  - This would let us drop the dependency on Xargo for embedded development
  - Need to ask Alex if there are builders available for this.

- Extend the Rust HAL for the photon as needed (as requested by the Particle
  community).

- Analyze feedback from the current needs u.r-l.o thread.
