# Requirements

This is a collection of blockers and/or requirements that users have expressed
in the following threads:

[u.r-l.o thread](https://users.rust-lang.org/t/rust-for-embedded-development-where-we-are-and-whats-missing/10861)

[reddit thread](https://www.reddit.com/r/rust/comments/6c090a/helpwanted_rust_for_embedded_development_where_we/)

[rust-embedded/rfcs](https://github.com/rust-embedded/rfcs/issues/26)


## Summary

The user input has been classified using tags. Here the list of tag occurrences:

```
$ grep '^Tags' requirements.md | cut -d':' -f2 | tr ',' '\n' | tr -d ' ' | sort | uniq -c | sort -k2nr | tac
      6 target-support
      6 hal
      4 documentation
      4 tutorials
      4 tooling
      4 crate-ecosystem
      3 more-buy-in
      3 configuration-manager
      3 c-bindings
      3 board-support
      2 stable-channel
      2 happy-user
      2 framework
      2 discoverability
      1 testing
      1 embedding
      1 dynamic-linking
      1 core-library
      1 conventions
```

And here's the meaning of the tags

`target-support`. The Rust compiler or the standard libraries (core or std)
don't support a certain target at all or well enough to build applications. Lack
of support refers to: missing support in LLVM (e.g. Xtensa), an incomplete /
buggy LLVM backend (e.g. AVR / MSP430), or that the standard libraries don't
compile for the target (e.g. ARMv5 due to lack of native atomic instructions)

`hal`. A Hardware Abstraction Layer (HAL) is an API that hides away device
specific details (e.g. registers, addresses and magic values) and lets you write
code in a generic way so that it can then be compiled for different devices and
architectures.

`documentation`. General documentation category. Anything from API references,
passing through "how does this" work documentation (e.g. how target
specification files work?) all the way to how do I do this documentation (i.e.
tutorials, patterns).

`tutorials`. "How do I do this" documentation. Walkthrough style and more
application development focused.

`tooling`. Refers to lack of tooling or lack of ease of use of the tooling.

`crate-ecosystem`. Refers to lack of no-std and/or device specific crates.

`more-buy-in`. Rust should have showcase projects that draw developers / clients
into the language / ecosystem.

`configuration-manager`. Once you write generic code you want to be able to
compile it for different devices, boards, or more generally for different
configurations (memory layout (linker argument customization), how the hardware
is wired up, etc. are part of a configuration). The general sentiment is that
Cargo, custom targets and binary Cargo features are not enough for this job.

`c-bindings`. Bindings to more C libraries, C HALs (e.g. CMSIS) and C (RT)OSes
(MyNewt) are needed.

`stable-channel`. Want to be able to build embedded applications using the
stable channel. Main blockers here are Xargo (nightly is required to compile the
core crate), and the `panic_fmt` lang item.

`happy-user`. Someone who's already happily using Rust on embedded systems!

`framework`. Wants a high level framework (e.g. Arduino) for getting stuff done.

`discoverability`. Wants a single place to find out about the state of embedded
Rust ("all information is currently scatted in blog post, repositories, etc.").
Or wants better discoverability of no-std crates.

`board-support`. Wants Rust support (crates) for a specific development board.

`testing`. A clearer story for testing embedded / no_std code.

`embedding`. Wants to use Rust as a module of a C application.

`dynamic-linking`. Wants dynamic linking support for producing smaller binaries.

`core-library`. Wants more functionality in the core library, like stable
floating point operations (sqrt, abs), and CStr, Path, etc.

`conventions`. Set conventions around things like error handling and panicking
which is much more critical / problematic in no_std context

## Data

### whitequark

- I write pure Rust applications. This is most of the selling point of Rust on
  Embedded to me. In general, we do greenfield implementations, so we can
  experiment quite a bit. I'm already quite happy with Rust on Embedded overall!

Tags: happy-user

- An explanation on how to perform cooperative multitasking in the RTFM idle
  thread. I know, futures and stuff, but honestly I find Rust's futures
  impenetrable. Going to no_std makes it harder.

Tags: documentation

- Careful attempts at producing HALs. At first, just something to manipulate
  clocks ergonomically and with more portability across series, in a
  standardized way. I'm wary of overly brazen attempts in this area so I'll
  watch from afar for now :slight_smile:

Tags: hal

- The tools don't fit together very well just yet. The autocomplete is broken
  in ST3 and I don't know why--I may be missing something obvious. .cargo/config
  isn't the right place and form for target configuration (as discussed
  elsewhere). A few other things locked on Cargo that are also (less) relevant
  on hosted platforms, e.g. sorting out the profiles mess.

Tags: tooling, configuration-manager

### awygle

- You already know my problem here :slight_smile: - lack of MSP430 support.

Tags: target-support

- I'll +1 the HAL as well - I'd love one of these if it were well-designed. Off
  the top of my head I suggest two interfaces for many peripherals, one
  interrupt-driven and one DMA-driven. Trying to combine those two things
  together tends to be where the lack of usefulness of overly-abstracted HALs
  comes in, IME.

Tags: hal

### adamgreig

- I get that the dev board support isn't for me, but it seems some things that
  are more MCU-centric are ending up in dev board crates.

Tags: crate-ecosystem

- I know I'm basically asking for a HAL here so... I look forward to seeing
  what happens with HALs

Tags: hal

- I want to write pure Rust applications, but I expect to start with I'll be
  using Rust to build libraries to link in to C applications, where the C ends
  up doing the HAL and possibly the multithreading and the Rust handles the
  interesting logic, and hopefully move more and more into Rust over time.

Tags: c-bindings

- I would love to have a better answer to managing multiple build
  configurations well but it's not super important.

Tags: configuration-manager

- Being able to use stable Rust would be really nice (I already try to use it
  for no_std libraries and just make the final executable with nightly).

Tags: stable-channel

### therealjpster

- I'm looking at ways to use Rust with RTOSes we already know like Mentor
    Graphics Nucleus and MyNewt project (I'm very excited about that one).

Tags: c-bindings

- I'm keen to see support for multiple platforms, and to agree some kind of
  HAL (in the form of discrete crates, like embedded-serial2 with
  Windows/Linux/Mac support. As a professional embedded engineer for a product
  design company I also need client buy-in.)

Tags: hal, more-buy-in

### rayman22201

- I have a bunch of old esp8266's lying around that I would LOVE to Rustify...

Tags: target-support

### jeko

- What I like is to have a minimal environment (vim, cli) to write, compile,
  test and load my apps.

Tags: tooling

### SimonSapin

I think the lesson is that panics in embedded contexts are much more problematic
than in other contexts. I’m used sprinkle assert! statements that might help
catch bugs, but when there is no OS and a panic crashes the whole system it
might be better to print some diagnostics (if there’s a serial port available
that’s not blocking when disconnected) and carry on, even with values that are
known to be incorrect.

What does this mean? In libraries, return Result or Option instead of panicking,
as much as possible. That’s better design in any context, not just embedded. In
applications, avoid assert!, unwrap, expect, etc. Consider unwrap_or,
unwrap_or_else, unwrap_or_default etc instead. Or some version of those that
print some diagnostics message somewhere.

It would be nice to have a library for that, but where would it print. Perhaps
another library could provide something like static STDERR:
Mutex<Option<&'static mut core::io::Write>> and eprint! / eprintln! macros that
use it?

Tags: crate-ecosystem, conventions

### Razican

- So, from my side, newbie tutorials for common user-oriented boards (such as
  C.H.I.P., Pine64, Raspberry Pi, Arduino) would be awesome. I would also like
  to learn some real-time development for powerful boards (things like video
  processing).

Tags: board-support, tutorials

### Michael-F-Bryan

- I want to use Rust as a component of a C/C++ application.

Tags: embedding

- It's mostly human reasons (lack of familiarity, inertia, etc) rather than
  technical ones at the moment. Dealing with that is probably going to be a case
  of more documentation, blog posts, and tutorials than anything else, but being
  able to show Rust is being used for embedded stuff elsewhere will go a long
  way when selling it to the rest of the team.  TL; DR: We need more resources
  like tutorials, docs, and blog posts. Existing microcontroller companies set a
  pretty low standard for docs, so if Rust shows itself to be easier to use in
  embedded applications than C/C++ that'd do wonders for adoption.

Tags: documentation, tutorials, more-buy-in

### jolson

- Rust doesn't support my target device architectures, in my case AVR and
  older ARM (pre Cortex).

Tags: target-support

### creationix

- My dream for the hobbyists market would be a rust framework with similar
  abstraction level to Arduino wiring, but for the Padi board with full wifi
  support.

Tags: board-support

### bestouff

- Probably a long shot, but is there any chance to have Rust for the PRU, the
  micro-controllers embedded into TI's Sitara, as found in the BeagleBone Black?

Tags: target-support

### alevy (Tock OS)

- we're using Rust!!

Tags: happy-user

- Testing (especially if possible testing without cross-compiling if possible)

Tags: testing

- Stable Rust support (we're unlikely to care in the kernel, but I really want
  userland Rust processes to be able to use stable)

Tags: stable-channel

- Embedded specific crates ecosystem---this one is hard because I don't want
  to pollute the namespace with a bunch of tock-some-peripheral crate on
  crates.io, but getting to totally common interfaces across frameworks seems
  like it will definitely challenging, and maybe impossible (or undesriable at
  least).

Tags: crate-ecosystem

### tl8roy

- In general tooling needs to get better. While I don't consider installing
  another tool to be a big issue, cross compiling can still get tricky with
  various crates (I am looking at you OpenSSL). I don't really want to go
  through that pain again.

Tags: tooling

- I would like to see some higher level abstractions. A lot of the work I have
  seen is low level so fair (in general). I know that if I wanted too, I could
  get started with that, but I don't really want to invest the time dealing with
  timers and registers.

Tags: framework

- As mentioned in this post, Traits and crates for various peripherals. The
  trait system works really well for this as PWM, ADC, DAC, UART, SPI, I2C,
  Parallel LCD, Interrupts and Timers all have the same format, but with
  different implementations for each processor. Some work actually defining how
  these peripherals should work in a common crate would go really far in making
  it easier for my to get involved.

Tags: hal

### juleskers

- I'm getting the impression that the NeoPixels are singlehandedly driving quite
  a few people into the microcontroller space, because they want fancy kitchen
  lighting1, art-projects, or whatever..
  I can attest that making colourful lights is quite the motivator :wink: so
  having "Rust can drive NeoPixels" as a marketing-:ballot_box_with_check: would
  be pretty cool in my opinion.

Tags: more-buy-in

### vorner

- As there are not compatible binary releases, building the std library took
  some experimenting. The Xargo tool is great and helps a lot (basically does
  all the work), but figuring how to use it wasn't exactly easy ‒ there isn't
  much documentation on how to configure which compiler to use, and so on.

Tags: documentation

- Documentation on how to define own target triple is also a bit sparse.

Tags: documentation

- The biggest current issue we face is that musl implies static linking.

Tags: target-support

- For larger use (not just one of the programs there, but a lot of the codebase)
  we would need smaller binaries and hopefully dynamic linking to the standard
  library

Tags: dynamic-linking

### chrish

- In my opinion, one of the things that would help most right now is simply
  having a central place on the rust-lang.org website to find the basics for
  getting started, etc. Right now that information is scattered in blog posts,
  posts on /r/rust, and other places, and I actually learned a fair number of
  new things just from reading the "Current Status" part of your post. So just
  having something like that on a "Rust for Embedded Software" section of the
  rust-lang.org website (and keeping it reasonably up-to-date) would be really
  useful.

Tags: discoverability

### jahmez

- I also agree with @jcsoo - Cargo does provide most of the package management
  utilities needed today, but I think we will begin to hit struggles when
  combining crates which act like board support packages, system libraries (like
  hardware drivers), "userspace" libraries (such as encryption libraries) and
  other general purpose components.

Tags: configuration-manager

### kt315i

- "...Getting rid of Xargo...". Yes. I was able to crossplatform the build for
  eabihf on windows only after LLVM 4.0 and only after slow and focused reading
  of your guides. Before LLVM 4.0 the only way to build on windows was to use
  Linus subsystem on Windows (Ubuntu). TLDR: Can not wait for
  thumbv7em-none-eabihf to become 1st class target for build on windows for
  crossplaform development through Cargo.

Tags: tooling

### kixunil

- backends for AVR (in progress, fortunately) and Xtensa (at least ESP8266)

Tags: target-support

- crates for popular MCUs (ARM, AVR, ESP8266)

Tags: board-support

- traits and crate for various peripherals. Ideally it should be easy to write
  project that runs on both OS and bare-metal. (So people can switch
  RPi/Arduino/Whatever.)

Tags: hal

- crates should be idiomatic, statically preventing mistakes where possible (I
  once spent ~40 min finding out that I wrote if(pin) instead of
  if(digitalRead(pin)). Arduino is designed badly, I believe.)

Tags: crate-ecosystem

- high-quality tutorials

Tags: tutorials

- Arduino-like experience for relevant hardware (write code, choose board,
  choose port, upload)

Tags: framework

### silwol

- We have some custom-developed board for which it would be interesting to run
  Rust-based firmware. It is equipped with an Stm32F427IIT6. We currently use
  C++ based firmware, but I would love to investigate running Rust on both the
  electronics hardware as well as the PC communicating with it. The one big
  thing that has kept me from looking into it (apart from my lack of time) is
  the fact that I have not yet heard anything about how to use the
  microcontroller as a USB device. Currently we're using the CMSIS-based USB
  stack for that. But the code of this does not look very clean, and I would
  love to see a cleaner framework with similar capabilities emerge in Rust. The
  recent blog posts about embedded devices made me quite confident that Rust has
  a bright future in that area.

Tags: c-bindings, tutorials

### Susurrus

- Core is missing functionality that would be appropriate to expose in core
  (not involve allocations or os-specific functionality). Right now that's
  things like signum(), sqrt(), and the like. It's a big surprise to users that
  they can't use sqrt() without the standard library! Other proposed
  functionality is OsStr and PathBuf and some of the UTF-16 processing, though
  for the first two it's a little unclear how those might be implemented. There
  are likely others and an audit of std would likely be enlightening.

Tags: core-library

- Users aren't aware of useful crates for no_std. This is a combination of
  exposure and the niche of no_std developers. Increasing users' exposure to
  no_std crates so they a) know they're available and b) think about making
  their crates suport no_std could be a good way to start here. I've suggested
  a badge on crates.io for no_std-compatible crates] to compliment the no_std
  keyword and no_std categories that are already there. Everyone loves badges!

Tags: discoverability
