# Weekly status report

From 2017-06-24 to 2017-06-30

## cortex-m.next

This week I have been landing a [bunch] of [scheduled] breaking changes in
crates core to cortex-m development. After getting feedback from the community
on the changes I think we are ready for the next minor release across several
crates. I'm currently finishing updating the documentation for the releases.

[bunch]: https://github.com/japaric/cortex-m/milestone/1
[scheduled]: https://github.com/japaric/cortex-m-rt/milestone/1

## RTFM v2

I opened a PR with the tentative [next generation] of the Real Time for The
Masses framework. This new version solves an outstanding borrow checker related
limitation that forced users to use Cells / RefCells to mutate resources. Now no
Cells / RefCells are required; this not only reduces runtime overhead but also
reduces the number of implicit panic! branches. The new version also now
supports supports using exceptions as tasks -- this has been enabled by the
recent changes in core dependencies -- and improves the ergonomics of using task
local data.

Feedback has been positive, but it has been questioned whether the huge
`macro_rules!` style macro introduced in this version could be replaced by
several `#[attribute]` style procedural macros. Sounds like a worthy experiment!

[next generation]: https://github.com/japaric/cortex-m-rtfm/pull/31

## Higher level HAL

This week [@posborne][] [asked] if the embedded-hal initiative plans to support
embedded Linux. The answer is yes! The embedded-hal project will provide low
level traits to be directly implemented by MCUs and higher level traits that
should be automatically (or with little effort) implemented for anything that
implements the low level traits. The higher level traits are the ones that will
be used to write drivers and the ones that embedded Linux will likely directly
implement (instead of the low level ones).

[@posborne]: https://github.com/posborne/
[asked]: https://github.com/japaric/embedded-hal/issues/17

However we have been blocked in making progress on the higher level traits due
to the requirement of "get the higher level traits for free if you implement the
low level ones". My original idea to fulfill that requirement was to use a
blanket `default impl` but turns out that doesn't at all today if the trait has
associated items. So I've come up with an alternative that doesn't require
`default impl`: using free functions as default implementations. I've written an
[RFC] proposing this workaround.

[RFC]: https://github.com/japaric/embedded-hal/issues/18

## faster memcpy, memset and memclr for microcontrollers

This week I revisited [an old PR] for optimizing these core operations on ARM
for 4 byte aligned inputs. These operations are used in the initialization of
virtually every Cortex-M program and may significantly affect boot time in some
applications. The optimizations reduced the execution time of these routines by
40-70% for meaningful inputs. My initial implementation was written in assembly
but turns out that rewriting it in Rust resulted in an even faster memcpy and
solved remaining concerns about portability.

[an old PR]: https://github.com/rust-lang-nursery/compiler-builtins/pull/164

## Community highlight

This week, [@alexcrichton] took on the titanic task of landing the
[compiler-builtins] crate, a re-implementation of LLVM's [compiler-rt], in
rust-lang/rust. After a massive [refactor] that greatly improved the readability
of the code and increased the test suite coverage, Alex sent a [PR] to land
compiler-builtins in the rust repo. The PR has already been approved and it's in
the bors queue.

[@alexcrichton]: https://github.com/alexcrichton
[compiler-builtins]: https://github.com/rust-lang-nursery/compiler-builtins
[compiler-rt]: https://github.com/llvm-mirror/compiler-rt
[refactor]: https://github.com/rust-lang-nursery/compiler-builtins/pull/166
[PR]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/42899

This was one of the remaining blockers for producing binary releases of rust-std
for the thumb targets; the other blocker is CI build capacity. With these
releases it would become possible to develop Cortex-M libraries and applications
without Xargo, and eventually develop Cortex-M libraries on stable.

## TODO

- Next minor release of core cortex-m crates.

- Multi arch support in svd2rust

- Continue working on the HAL.

- Launch an initial version of the areweembeddedyet.com site.

- Start a series of blog posts about developing the robotic application.

- Finish cleaning the crate that supports the BLE400 development board and
  announce on u.r-l.o.
